# Getting AI-assisted Help with Red Hat Enterprise Linux Lightspeed

## Red Hat Enterprise Linux Lightspeed

Red Hat Enterprise Linux Lightspeed combines decades of Red Hat Enterprise Linux expertise with AI technologies to proactively inform and simplify how both newer and experienced Linux professionals build, deploy, and manage Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL).

Components that are powered by RHEL Lightspeed enable customers to focus more of their time and resources on innovation and less on maintenance. RHEL Lightspeed technologies are intended to provide proactive guidance, knowledge, and recommendations, thus making RHEL more intuitive and easy to use. RHEL Lightspeed technologies are included in your Red Hat Enterprise Linux subscription.

Two components powered by RHEL Lightspeed are available simultaneously with the launch of RHEL 10:

### Command-line assistant

The new Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) command-line assistant, powered by RHEL Lightspeed, lets you ask an English-language question directly in the terminal to get instant answers, recommendations, and guidance, backed by decades of RHEL knowledge and expertise. The command-line assistant simplifies complex tasks for newer Linux administrators, and boosts efficiency for seasoned admins, bringing AI-powered help straight to the command line in RHEL 10.

### Red Hat Insights image builder package recommendations

New package recommendations in Red Hat Insights image builder help you to make more informed decisions early in the build process. As you select packages, the tool suggests additional recommendations to help you minimize the risk of missing key components so that you can create more complete, functional images from the start.

RHEL Lightspeed is designed for system administrators, platform engineers, and developers who manage RHEL systems, regardless of their level of Linux experience. RHEL Lightspeed technologies are intended to improve productivity, enhance the user experience, and streamline system administration.

#### Command-line Assistant Powered by RHEL Lightspeed

**The Large Language Model:** 

RHEL Lightspeed uses the IBM watsonx AI API large language model (LLM). The model is hosted externally and is provided as SaaS (Software-as-a-Service) for all registered RHEL systems. The LLM model is hosted on the watsonx AI platform, and uses the watsonx LLM IBM Granite model.

The LLM that powers the command-line assistant is trained on various Red Hat resources, including Knowledge Center Service (KCS) articles, RHEL documentation, and more.

**Installing the Command-line Assistant**

To use the command-line assistant, you must be running a subscribed system. You can use the subscription-manager tool to manage system subscriptions. RHEL 10.0 and RHEL 9.6 and later versions are supported.

The first time that you use the command-line assistant, install the command-line-assistant package:

```bash
dnf install command-line-assistant
```
This package provides the c command, which is the primary user interface for the command-line assistant. Run the c command to verify that the installation works:

```bash
c chat "How do I list running services?"
```

**Troubleshooting with the Command-line Assistant**

The command-line assistant can be a powerful tool to help you to troubleshoot problems. Although the tool is useful for someone with limited Linux expertise, it is also helpful for someone who can quickly understand and act on the responses that the command-line assistant provides.

To use the command-line assistant effectively, begin by asking clear, well-structured questions. This approach is especially important for troubleshooting problems, because clear and precise phrasing generates more relevant responses, which helps you to identify and resolve problems more quickly.

The simplest way to interact with the command-line assistant is by asking a direct, natural-language question. For example, to ask a question about how to check the status of the SSH daemon on your system, you can enter the following text:

```bash
c chat "How do I check the status of the sshd service?"
```

**Interactive Mode**

For more complex scenarios, you might engage in a turn-based conversation. This approach can provide more context for the command-line assistant to use when answering your questions. In such cases, you can launch the assistant in interactive mode:

```bash
c chat --interactive
```

**Analyzing Command Output**

Context is vital in troubleshooting, and the command-line assistant becomes far more useful when it has specific data to analyze. One of the most powerful features is the ability to pipe command output directly into the command-line assistant.

For instance, if you are reviewing logs from Apache HTTP Server and want help diagnosing recent errors, then you could run the following command:

```bash
sudo journalctl -u httpd.service --since "1 hour ago" | \
c chat "What could be causing errors in these logs?"
```

Another common and complex scenario is troubleshooting a suspected memory leak. You can pipe the output of tools like top, ps, or even smem into the command-line assistant and ask it to interpret the results.

For example, you can provide the assistant with the current memory usage of running processes, so that it can identify unusually high or increasing memory consumption.

```bash
 ps aux --sort=-%mem | \
head -n 20 | \
c chat "Is there a possible memory leak in one of these processes?"
```

**Analyzing File Content**

You can also send file content to the command-line assistant for analysis. This functionality is particularly helpful when reviewing configuration files or long logs, for example:

```bash
cat /var/log/messages | \
c chat "Look for critical errors in this log file."
```

**Analyzing Data**

You can also attach data directly by using the `--attachment` or `-a` flags. For example, to analyze the system boot log, you might run the following command:

```bash
c chat -a /var/log/boot.log "Why did the last boot take so long?"
```
