# Installing Red Hat Enterprise Linux Interactively
---

## Installation Media

Red Hat provides different forms of installation media that you can download from the Customer Portal website by using your active subscription.

- A binary image file in ISO 9660 format that contains the Anaconda Red Hat Enterprise Linux installation program, and the BaseOS and AppStream package repositories. These repositories contain the necessary packages to complete the installation without additional repositories.

- A smaller boot ISO image file that contains only the Anaconda installer, and which requires network access during installation to download packages from online repositories that are hosted by HTTP, FTP, or NFS servers.

- Source code (human-readable programming language instructions) for Red Hat Enterprise Linux. The source DVDs have no documentation. This image helps to compile or develop your software according to the Red Hat Enterprise Linux version. The availability of the operating system source code offers transparency and helps developers to build their own software by using Red Hat Enterprise Linux as a foundation.

Red Hat Enterprise Linux 10 supports the following architectures:

- AMD and Intel 64-bit architectures (x86-64-v3)
- The 64-bit ARM architecture (ARMv8.0-A)
- IBM Power Systems, Little Endian (POWER9)
- 64-bit IBM Z (z14)

After downloading your preferred image, create bootable installation media by following the instructions in the Interactively Installing RHEL from Installation Media guide.
https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/10/html-single/interactively_installing_rhel_from_installation_media/index

For example, to install RHEL on a bare-metal server, you could copy one of the ISO images to a USB drive and boot from that.

## Build Customized Images with RHEL Image Builder