# Manage Files from the Command Line

```bash
ssh student@serverb
```

- Create the /home/student/grading directory.

```bash
mkdir /home/student/grading
```

- Create three empty files named grade1, grade2, and grade3, in the /home/student/grading directory.

```bash
touch /home/student/grading/grade{1,2,3}
```

- Capture the first five lines of the /home/student/bin/manage file in the /home/student/grading/review.txt file.

```bash
head -n 5  /home/student/bin/manage >  /home/student/grading/review.txt
```

- Without overwriting any existing text, append the last three lines of the /home/student/bin/manage file to the /home/student/grading/review.txt file.

```bash
tail -n 3  /home/student/bin/manage >> /home/student/grading/review.txt
```

- Copy the /home/student/grading/review.txt file to the /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt file.

```bash
cp -dR /home/student/grading/review.txt /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt
```

- Duplicate the Test JJ line in the /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt file. Make sure that the duplicated line appears immediately after the original line.

```bash
tail -n 1 /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt >> /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt
```

- Remove the Test HH line from the /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt file.

```bash
sed -i '/Test HH/d' /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt
```

- Add the `Level 1 Training` line between the Test `BB` line and the Test `CC` line in the `/home/student/grading/review-copy.txt` file.

```bash
sed -i '/Test BB/a Level 1 Training' /home/student/grading/review-copy.txt
```

- Create a link named data-backup that points to the same data as the /home/student/grading/grade1 file.

```bash
ln /home/student/grading/grade1 /home/student/data-backup
stat data-backup
```

- Create a link named filename-backup that points to the /home/student/grading/grade2 file name.

```bash
ln -s /home/student/grading/grade2 ~/filename-backup
ls -l ~
```
- List the contents of the `/boot` directory and save the output to the `/home/student/grading/longlisting.txt` file. The output should be a long listing that includes the file permissions, owner and group owner, size, and modification date of each file. The output must omit hidden files.

```bash
ls -l /boot > /home/student/grading/longlisting.txt
```