# Configure and Secure SSH
---
✅ **Task 1:** 

From the workstation machine, log in to the servera machine as the student user.

```bash
ssh student@servera
```

✅ **Task 2:** 

Switch to the production1 user on the servera machine. Enter redhat as the password.

```bash
su - production1
```

✅ **Task 3:** 

Generate SSH keys for the production1 user on the servera machine. Do not set a passphrase.

```bash
ssh-keygen
```

✅ **Task 4:** 
Send the SSH public key for the production1 user on the servera machine to the production1 user on the serverb machine. Use redhat as the password.

```bash
ssh-copy-id production1@serverb
```

✅ **Task 5:** 

From the servera machine, verify that the production1 user can successfully log in to the serverb machine by using SSH keys.


```bash
ssh production1@servera
```

✅ **Task 6:** 

Configure the sshd service on the serverb machine to prevent users from logging in as the root user. Use redhat as the root password. Open a second terminal to verify that the production1 user cannot log in to the serverb machine as the root user.

```bash
# serverb
ssh root@serverb
vim /etc/ssh/sshd_config
    PermitRootLogin prohibit-password

systemctl restart sshd.service
exit

#servera
ssh root@serverb
```

✅ **Task 7:** 

Use the first terminal to configure the sshd service on the serverb machine so that users must authenticate with SSH keys and cannot authenticate with their passwords. Use the second terminal to verify that users must use SSH keys to log in to the serverb machine. First, attempt to log in to the serverb machine as the production2 user, where SSH keys are not configured. Then, attempt to log in as the production1 user by using SSH keys.

```bash
# serverb
sudo root@serverb
vim /etc/ssh/sshd_config
    PasswordAuthentication no

systemctl restart sshd.service

# servera
ssh production2@serverb
```
