## Registering Systems for Red Hat Support

In 2024, Red Hat transitioned to a subscription model named Simple Content Access (SCA). This access-based subscription model enforces the existence of a valid subscription on a per-organization basis, eliminating the need to attach subscriptions on a per-system level. The new model reduces complexity in subscription management and tooling. As part of this migration, customer-facing subscription services moved from the Red Hat Customer Portal (https://access.redhat.com) to the Red Hat Hybrid Cloud Console (https://console.redhat.com). The Hybrid Cloud Console provides a unified experience for systems management and closer integration with Red Hat Insights.

## Registering a RHEL System

You can use different options to register a system to the Red Hat subscription service. For example, you might use the graphical RHEL web console or command-line tools such as remote host configuration (`rhc`) or subscription manager (`subscription-manager`).

You can use these tools to perform the following actions with your systems:

- Register a system to associate it with a Red Hat account that has an active subscription. During registration, the system receives unique identity certificates for authentication to the Red Hat subscriptions service.

- Enable additional repositories to provide access to software packages as needed. Default repositories are automatically enabled for installed products, which provides immediate access to content.

- Review and track available or consumed entitlements on the Subscription Inventory page of the Hybrid Cloud Console.

- Optionally, register with Red Hat Insights for predictive analytics and proactive issue resolution.

## Registering a System with the rhc Tool
The `rhc` command-line tool is available for registering RHEL 8.8 and later systems. By default, the rhc tool enables three features: `content`, `analytics` and `remote-management`. These features allow your system to access content repositories and enables the Red Hat Insights analytics and remediation services with a single command.

To use the `rhc` tool, you must authenticate by using a Red Hat account that has a valid subscription. Additionally, you must have root access on the system to be able to register it.

```bash
 rhc connect
 ```

The `rhc` command enables all three of the main features by default. If you want to enable only access to content repositories without registering to Red Hat Insights, then you can disable the analytics and `remote-management` features during registration. You can disable these features by using the rhc connect command with the `--disable-feature` option.

```bash
rhc connect --disable-feature=analytics,remote-management
```

### Using an Activation Key with the rhc Tool

To register a system securely in a more automated way, use the rhc connect command along with an activation key and your organization identifier (numeric identifier). This method is more secure than providing personal usernames and passwords.

An activation key is a pre-shared authentication token that you can create and manage in the Hybrid Cloud Console. On the dashboard, click Insights for RHEL, and then select `Inventory` → `System Configuration` → `Activation Keys`.

When you create an activation key, you have the option to associate the key with the latest RHEL version or to lock the key to a specific earlier release. You can optionally also define the system purpose, which is a tagging mechanism to help identify hosts in the inventory later. You can also define additional repositories for the activation key, which can further simplify configuring a system during registration.

The following example shows how to use an activation key with the rhc command.

```bash
rhc connect --activation-key=<activation_key_name> --organization=<organization_ID>
```

## Unregistering a System with the rhc Tool

To unregister your system, use the `rhc disconnect` command:

```bash
rhc disconnect
```

### Registering a System with the subscription-manager Tool

The `rhc` command is the preferred tool to register systems, but the `rhc` command is not available for RHEL 8.7 or earlier releases. As an alternative, you can use the subscription-manager command to register your systems. The subscription-manager tool is also helpful in cases where you want to enable repository access without connecting to Red Hat Insights.

In RHEL 10, several subscription-manager modules that were related to attaching subscriptions on a per-system basis have been removed. However, the `subscription-manager` tool is not superseded or deprecated in RHEL 10, and continues to function similarly to its earlier versions.

Because of the transition to Simple Content Access, registering a system by using the subscription-manager tool is accomplished in a single step:

```bash
subscription-manager register
```

If you have created an activation key in the Hybrid Cloud Console, then you can use it to register your system without using your username and password:

```bash
 subscription-manager register \
--activationkey <activation_key_name> --org <organization_ID>
```

To verify the registration status of your system, you can use the `subscription-manager status` command:

```bash
subscription-manager status
```

The subscription-manager command cannot connect your system to Red Hat Insights. After registration, you can use the insights-client command to enable Red Hat Insights:
```bash
insights-client --register
```


### Setting System Purpose Attributes

System purpose is an optional tagging mechanism that helps to filter your inventory. You can set the following attributes and values by using the `subscription-manager` command:

Role

- Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux Workstation
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux Compute Node

Service-Level Agreement

- Premium
- Standard
- Self-Support

Usage

- Production
- Development/Test
- Disaster Recovery

Use the `subscription-manager syspurpose` command to set relevant system purpose attributes:

```bash
root@host:~# subscription-manager syspurpose role \
--set 'Red Hat Enterprise Linux Workstation'
role set to "Red Hat Enterprise Linux Workstation".

root@host:~# subscription-manager syspurpose service-level \
--set 'Premium'
service_level_agreement set to "Premium".

root@host:~# subscription-manager syspurpose usage \
--set 'Development/Test'
usage set to "Development/Test".
```

The `syspurpose` subcommand also supports the `--list` option to help list the available values for each attribute. For example, the following command checks the list of available values for the usage attribute:

```bash
root@host:~# subscription-manager syspurpose usage --list
-------------------------------------------
               Available usage
-------------------------------------------
 - Development/Test
```

### Unregistering a System with the subscription-manager Tool

With the `subscription-manager` tool, removing a registration is a one-step process:

```bash
root@host:~# subscription-manager unregister
Unregistering from: subscription.rhsm.redhat.com:443/subscription
System has been unregistered.
```