# Matching File Names with Shell Expansions

## Command-line Expansions

When you type a command at the Bash shell prompt, the shell processes that command line through multiple expansions before running it. You can use these shell expansions to perform complex tasks that would otherwise be difficult or impossible.

The Bash shell performs the following expansions:
- Pathname expansion, which helps to select one or more files by pattern matching.
- Brace expansion, which can generate multiple strings of characters.
- Tilde expansion, which expand to a path to a user home directory.
- Variable expansion, which replaces text with the value that is stored in a shell variable.
- Command substitution, which replaces text with the output of a command.


### Pathname expansion

Pathname expansion, historically called globbing, is one of the most useful features of Bash. Pathname expansion uses wildcards, which are metacharacters that expand to match the file and path names that you are looking for. As a result, commands can act on a focused set of files during a single execution. This feature helps system administrators to manage many files.

Pathname expansion expands a pattern of special characters that represent wildcards or classes of characters into a list of file names that match the pattern. Before the shell runs your command, it replaces the pattern with the list of file names that match. If the pattern does not match anything, then the shell tries to use the pattern as a literal argument for the command that it runs.

The following table lists common metacharacters and pattern classes that are used for pattern matching.


### Table 7.1: Metacharacters and Their Matches

| Pattern           | Matches                                                                 |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `*`              | Any string of zero or more characters                                   |
| `?`              | Any single character                                                    |
| `[abc…]`         | Any one character in the enclosed class (between the square brackets)   |
| `[!abc…]`        | Any one character **not** in the enclosed class                         |
| `[^abc…]`        | Any one character **not** in the enclosed class (alternative to `!`)    |
| `[[:alpha:]]`    | Any alphabetic character (`A–Z`, `a–z`)                                 |
| `[[:lower:]]`    | Any lowercase alphabetic character (`a–z`)                              |
| `[[:upper:]]`    | Any uppercase alphabetic character (`A–Z`)                              |
| `[[:alnum:]]`    | Any alphabetic character or digit (`A–Z`, `a–z`, `0–9`)                  |
| `[[:punct:]]`    | Any printable punctuation character (not space or alphanumeric)         |
| `[[:digit:]]`    | Any single digit from `0` to `9`                                        |
| `[[:space:]]`    | Any whitespace character (space, tab, newline, carriage return, etc.)   |


### Brace Expansion

Brace expansion generates discretionary strings of characters. Braces contain a comma-separated list of strings, or a sequence of expression. The result includes the text that precedes or follows the brace definition. Brace expansions might be nested, one inside another. You can also use double-dot syntax (..), which expands to a sequence.

```bash
user@host:~/glob$ echo {Sunday,Monday,Tuesday,Wednesday}.log
Sunday.log Monday.log Tuesday.log Wednesday.log

user@host:~/glob$ echo file{1..3}.txt
file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt

user@host:~/glob$ echo file{a..c}.txt
filea.txt fileb.txt filec.txt

user@host:~/glob$ echo file{a,b}{1,2}.txt
filea1.txt filea2.txt fileb1.txt fileb2.txt

user@host:~/glob$ echo file{a{1,2},b,c}.txt
filea1.txt filea2.txt fileb.txt filec.txt
```

### Tilde Expansion

In the Bash shell, the tilde character (~) is a shortcut for the current user's home directory. You can also use a tilde (~) followed by a username to resolve the home directory of the provided user.

In the following example, the tilde is a shortcut for the home directory of the current user and for the home directory of a different user (manager1).

```bash
user@host:~/scripts$ echo ~
/home/user

user@host:~/scripts$ echo ~manager1
/home/manager1
```

In the following example, the root user uses the shortcut to list the scripts/run-app.sh file in the user home directory from the /var/log directory. Then, the root user tries to list the same file, but for the nonexistent dev1 user. In the second command, the shell interprets the tilde (~) as a regular character because the dev1 user does not exist.
```bash
root@host:/var/log# ls ~user/scripts/run-app.sh
/home/user/scripts/run-app.sh

root@host:/var/log# ls ~dev1/scripts/run-app.sh
ls: cannot access '~dev1/scripts/run-app.sh': No such file or directory
```

### Variable Expansion

A variable acts like a named container that stores a value in memory. Variables simplify accessing and modifying the stored data either from the command line or within a shell script.

You can assign data as a value to a variable with the following syntax.

```bash
user@host:~$ VARIABLENAME=value
```

```bash
user@host:~$ USERNAME=operator
user@host:~$ echo $USERNAME
operator
```

To prevent mistakes due to other shell expansions, you can put the name of the variable in curly braces, for example `${VARIABLENAME}`.

```bash
user@host:~$ USERNAME=operator
user@host:~$ echo ${USERNAME}
operator
```

Variable names can contain only letters (uppercase and lowercase), numbers, and underscores. Variable names are case-sensitive and cannot start with a number.

### Command Substitution

Command substitution enables the output of a command to replace the command itself on the command line. Command substitution occurs when you enclose a command in parentheses and precede it by a dollar sign ($). The $(command) form can nest multiple command expansions inside each other.

```bash
user@host:~/glob$ echo Today is $(date +%A).
Today is Wednesday.

user@host:~/glob$ echo The time is $(date +%M) minutes past $(date +%l%p).
The time is 26 minutes past 11AM.
```


### Protecting Arguments from Expansion

Many characters have a special meaning in the Bash shell. To prevent shell expansions on parts of your command line, you can quote and escape characters and strings.

The backslash (\) is an escape character in the Bash shell. It protects the following character from expansion.

```bash
user@host:~/glob$ echo The value of $HOME is your home directory.
The value of /home/user is your home directory.

user@host:~/glob$ echo The value of \$HOME is your home directory.
The value of $HOME is your home directory.
```

In the preceding example, with the dollar sign protected from expansion, Bash treats it as a regular character, and does not expand the `$HOME` variable.

To protect longer character strings, you can use single quotation marks (') or double quotation marks (") to enclose strings. They have slightly different effects. Single quotation marks stop all shell expansion. Double quotation marks stop most shell expansion.

Double quotation marks suppress special characters other than the dollar sign ($), backslash (\), backtick (), and exclamation point (!`) from operating inside the quoted text. Double quotation marks block pathname expansion, but still allow command substitution and variable expansion to occur.

```bash
user@host:~/glob$ myhost=$(hostname -s); echo $myhost
host

user@host:~/glob$ echo "***** hostname is ${myhost} *****"
***** hostname is host ****
```

Use single quotation marks to interpret all text between the quotes literally.

```bash
user@host:~/glob$ echo "Will variable $myhost evaluate to $(hostname -s)?"
Will variable host evaluate to host?

user@host:~/glob$ echo 'Will variable $myhost evaluate to $(hostname -s)?'
Will variable $myhost evaluate to $(hostname -s)?
```